# `Cppcls`  

## (Abridged, unfinished) Table of Contents 
- `virtualfunc.cpp` - pointer to inherited class vs. instance of inherited class; how does that change virtual member function?  
- `virtualdes2.cpp` - pointer to inherited class vs. instance of inherited class; how does that change scope, and which destructor?  

## copy constructor  

cf. [Copy constructors, cppreference.com](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/copy_constructor)  

copy constructor of class T is non-template constructor whose 1st parameter is `T&`, `const T&`, `volatile T&`, or `const volatile T&`.  

**Syntax**  

```  
class_name ( const class_name & )  
class_name ( const class_name & ) = default;  
class_name ( const class_name & ) = delete;
```  

**Explanation**  
1. Typical declaration of a copy constructor.  
2. Forcing copy constructor to be generated by the compiler.  
3. Avoiding implicit generation of copy constructor.  

Copy constructor called whenever an object is **initialized** (by **direct-initialization** or **copy-initialization**) from another object of same type (unless **overload resolution** selects better match or call is **elided** (???)), which includes  
* initialization `T a = b;` or `T a(b);`, where b is of type T;  
* function argument passing: `f(a);`, where a is of type T and f is `void f(T t)`;  
* function return: `return a;` inside function such as `T f()`, where a is of type T, which has no **move constructor**.  

**Example**  

```  
struct A
{
    int n;
    A(int n = 1) : n(n) { }
    A(const A& a) : n(a.n) { } // user-defined copy ctor
};
 
struct B : A
{
    // implicit default ctor B::B()
    // implicit copy ctor B::B(const B&)
};
  
int main()
{
    A a1(7);
    A a2(a1); // calls the copy ctor
    B b;
    B b2 = b;
    A a3 = b; // conversion to A& and copy ctor  
}
```      

i.e. cf. [Copy Constructor in C++](http://www.geeksforgeeks.org/copy-constructor-in-cpp/)

Copy constructor is a member function which initializes an object using another object of the same class.  

### When is copy constructor called?  

1. When object of class returned by value 
2. When object of class is passed (to a function) by value as an *argument*.  
3. When object is constructed based on another object of same class  (or overloaded)  
4. When compiler generates temporary object  

However, it's not guaranteed copy constructor will be called in all cases, because C++ standard allows compiler to optimize the copy away in certain cases.  

### When is used defined copy constructor needed?  shallow copy, deep copy  

If we don't define our own copy constructor, C++ compiler creates default copy constructor which does member-wise copy between objects.  

We need to define our own copy constructor only if an object has pointers or any run-time allocation of resource like file handle, network connection, etc.  

#### Default constructor does only shallow copy.  

#### Deep copy is possible only with user-defined copy constructor.  

We thus make sure pointers (or references) of copied object point to new memory locations.  

### Copy constructor vs. Assignment Operator  

```  
MyClass t1, t2; 
MyClass t3 = t1; 	// ----> (1)
t2 = t1; 			// -----> (2)
```  

Copy constructor called when new object created from an existing object, as copy of existing object, in (1).  
Assignment operator called when already initialized object is assigned a new value from another existing object, as assignment operator is called in (2).  

### Why argument to a copy constructor should be const?   

cf. [Why copy constructor argument should be const in C++?, `geeksforgeeks.org`](http://www.geeksforgeeks.org/copy-constructor-argument-const/)

1. Use `const` in C++ whenever possible so objects aren't accidentally modified.  
2. e.g.  
```  
#include <iostream>  

class Test
{
	/* Class data members */
	public:
		Test(Test &t) 	{ /* Copy data members from t */ } 
		Test()			{ /* Initialize data members */ }
};

Test fun() 
{
	Test t;
	return t;
};

int main()
{
	Test t1;
	Test t2 = fun(); // error: invalid initialization of non-const reference of type ‘Test&’ from an rvalue of type ‘Test’
}

``` 

`fun()` returns by value, so compiler creates temporary object which is copied to t2 using copy constructor (because this temporary object is passed as argument to copy constructor since compiler generates temp. object).  
Compiler error is because *compiler-created temporary objects cannot be bound to non-const references*. 




## vtable, virtual table  


I was given this answer to a question I posed to a 20 year C++ veteran and it was such an important answer (as I did not know a virtual table existed, at all before), that I will copy this, repeat this and explore this extensively:  

"The keyword you're looking for is virtual table: " [How are virtual functions and vtable implemented?, stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/99297/how-are-virtual-functions-and-vtable-implemented)  

Original question, from [Brian R. Bondy](https://stackoverflow.com/users/3153/brian-r-bondy):  

### How are virtual functions and vtable implemented?

We all know what virtual functions are in C++, but how are they implemented at a deep level?

Can the vtable be modified or even directly accessed at runtime?

Does the vtable exist for all classes, or only those that have at least one virtual function?

Do abstract classes simply have a NULL for the function pointer of at least one entry?

Does having a single virtual function slow down the whole class? Or only the call to the function that is virtual? And does the speed get affected if the virtual function is actually overwritten or not, or does this have no effect so long as it is virtual.

Answer from *community wiki*:  

How are virtual functions implemented at a deep level?

#### From ["Virtual Functions in C++"](http://wayback.archive.org/web/20100209040010/http://www.codersource.net/published/view/325/virtual_functions_in.aspx)

Whenever a program has a virtual function declared, a v - table is constructed for the class. The v-table consists of addresses to the virtual functions for classes that contain one or more virtual functions. The object of the class containing the virtual function contains a virtual pointer that points to the base address of the virtual table in memory.  

Whenever there is a virtual function call, the v-table is used to resolve to the function address.  

An object of the class that contains one or more virtual functions contains a virtual pointer called the vptr at the very beginning of the object in the memory. Hence the size of the object in this case increases by the size of the pointer. This vptr contains the base address of the virtual table in memory. Note that virtual tables are class specific, i.e., there is only one virtual table for a class irrespective of the number of virtual functions it contains. This virtual table in turn contains the base addresses of one or more virtual functions of the class.  

At the time when a virtual function is called on an object, the vptr of that object provides the base address of the virtual table for that class in memory. This table is used to resolve the function call as it contains the addresses of all the virtual functions of that class. This is how dynamic binding is resolved during a virtual function call.

cf. ["Virtual Functions in C++"](http://wayback.archive.org/web/20100209040010/http://www.codersource.net/published/view/325/virtual_functions_in.aspx)

##### What is a Virtual Function?

A virtual function is a member function of a class, whose functionality can be over-ridden in its derived classes. It is one that is declared as virtual in the base class using the virtual keyword. The virtual nature is inherited in the subsequent derived classes and the virtual keyword need not be re-stated there. The whole function body can be replaced with a new set of implementation in the derived class. 

##### What is Binding?  

Binding is associating an object or a class with its member.  
If we call a method `fn()` on an object `o` of a class `c`, we say that object `o` is binded with method `fn()`.  

This happens at *compile time* and is known as *static* - or *compile-time* binding.   

Calls to virtual member functions are resolved during *run-time*.  This mechanisms is known as *dynamic-binding.*   

The most prominent reason why a virtual function will be used is to have a different functionality in the derived class.  
The difference between a non-virtual member function and a virtual member function is, the non-virtual member functions are resolved at compile time.  

##### How does a Virtual Function work?  

When a program (code text?) has a virtual function declared, a **v-table** is *constructed* for the class.  

The v-table consists of addresses to virtual functions for classes that contain 1 or more virtual functions.  
The object of the class containing the virtual function *contains a virtual pointer* that points to the base address of the virtual table in memory.  An object of the class that contains 1 or more virtual functions contains a virtual pointer called the **vptr** at the very beginning of the object in the memory.  (Hence size of the object in this case increases by the size of the pointer; "memory/size overhead.")  

This vptr is added as a hidden member of this object.  As such, compiler must generate "hidden" code in the **constructors** of each class to initialize a new object's vptr to the address of its class's vtable.  


Whenever there's a virtual function call, vtable is used to resolve to the function address.  
This vptr contains base address of the virtual table in memory.  

Note that virtual tables are class specific, i.e. there's only 1 virtual table for a class, irrespective of number of virtual functions it contains, i.e.  

vtable is same for all objects belonging to the same class, and typically is shared between them.    
  

This virtual table in turn contains base addresses of 1 or more virtual functions of the class.  

At the time when a virtual function is called on an object, the vptr of that object provides the base address of the virtual table for that class in memory.  This table is used to resolve the function call as it contains the addresses of all the virtual functions of that class.  This is how dynamic binding is resolved during a virtual function call, i.e.  

class (inherited or base/parent) cannot, generally, be determined *statically* (i.e. **compile-time**), so compiler can't decide which function to call at that (compile) time.  (Virtual function) call must be dispatched to the right function *dynamically* (i.e. **run-time**).  
  

```  
#include <iostream>

class base
{
	public:
		virtual void display() 
		{
			std::cout << "\n Base " << std::endl; 
		}
};

class derived : public base 
{
	public:
		void display()
		{
			std::cout << "\n Derived" << std::endl; 
		}
};

void main() {
	base *ptr = new derived(); 
	ptr->display();  
}
```  

`base *ptr` is a pointer of type `base`, but **it points to the `derived` class object**.  
The method `display()` is `virtual` in nature.  Hence, in order to resolve the `virtual` method call, the context of the pointer is considered, i.e., the display method of the derived class is called and not that of the base.  
If method was non-virtual, `display()` method of base class would have been called.  

Remember, calls to virtual member functions are resolved during *run-time*, *dynamic-binding*, and vtable used to resolve function address, and vptr, that the object of the class contains, provides base address of the vtable for that class, in memory.  

##### Virtual Constructors and Destructors  

A constructor cannot be virtual because at the time when constructor is invoked, the vtable wouldn't be available in memory.  Hence, we can't have a virtual constructor.  

A virtual destructor is 1 that's declared as virtual in the base class, and is used to ensure that destructors are called in the proper order.  Remember that destructors are called in reverse order of inheritance.  If a base class pointer points to a derived class object, and we some time later use the delete operator to delete the object, then the derived class destructor is not called.  


cf. [How are virtual functions and vtable implemented?, stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/99297/how-are-virtual-functions-and-vtable-implemented)

#### Can the vtable be modified or even directly accessed at runtime?  No.  

"Universally, I believe the answer is "no". You could do some memory mangling to find the vtable but you still wouldn't know what the function signature looks like to call it. Anything that you would want to achieve with this ability (that the language supports) should be possible without access to the vtable directly or modifying it at runtime. Also note, the C++ language spec does not specify that vtables are required - however that is how most compilers implement virtual functions."  


#### Does the vtable exist for all objects, or only those that have at least one virtual function?  Only for class with at least 1 virtual function.  

I believe the answer here is "it depends on the implementation" since the spec doesn't require vtables in the first place. However, in practice, I believe all modern compilers only create a vtable if a class has at least 1 virtual function. There is a space overhead associated with the vtable and a time overhead associated with calling a virtual function vs a non-virtual function.


#### Do abstract classes simply have a NULL for the function pointer of at least one entry?

The answer is it is unspecified by the language spec so it depends on the implementation. Calling the pure virtual function results in undefined behavior if it is not defined (which it usually isn't) (ISO/IEC 14882:2003 10.4-2). In practice it does allocate a slot in the vtable for the function but does not assign an address to it. This leaves the vtable incomplete which requires the derived classes to implement the function and complete the vtable. Some implementations do simply place a NULL pointer in the vtable entry; other implementations place a pointer to a dummy method that does something similar to an assertion.

Note that an abstract class can define an implementation for a pure virtual function, but that function can only be called with a qualified-id syntax (ie., fully specifying the class in the method name, similar to calling a base class method from a derived class). This is done to provide an easy to use default implementation, while still requiring that a derived class provide an override.


### Example, from [Virtual method table, wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_method_table), with gdb

```  
#include <iostream>

class B1 {
	public:
		virtual ~B1() {}
		void f0() {}
		virtual void f1() {}
		int int_in_b1;
};  

class B2 {
	public:
		virtual ~B2() {}
		virtual void f2() {}
		int int_in_b2;
};

class D : public B1, public B2 {
	public:
		void d() {}
		void f2() {}  // override B2::f2()
		int int_in_d;
}; 

int main() {
	B2 *b2 = new B2(); 
	D *d   = new D(); 
}  	
```  	

Demonstrating the usage of **info vtbl**, getting information about a virtual method table (vtable) of an object, and **info symbol** to go from address of vtable to actual type of the object.  

```  
// break at line 43 or anywhere before end of main program  
(gdb) b 43 
Breakpoint 1 at 0x4008a3: /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.cpp:43. (3 locations)
(gdb) run
Starting program: /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe 

...

Breakpoint 1, main () at vtable.cpp:49
49	}
(gdb) p b2
$8 = (B2 *) 0x614c20
(gdb) p &b2
$9 = (B2 **) 0x7fffffffde08
(gdb) p d
$10 = (D *) 0x614c40
(gdb) p &d
$11 = (D **) 0x7fffffffde00
(gdb) info vtbl b2
vtable for 'B2' @ 0x400bb0 (subobject @ 0x614c20):
[0]: 0x400952 <B2::~B2()>
[1]: 0x40096a <B2::~B2()>
[2]: 0x400996 <B2::f2()>
(gdb) info vtbl d
vtable for 'D' @ 0x400b58 (subobject @ 0x614c40):
[0]: 0x400a28 <D::~D()>
[1]: 0x400a72 <D::~D()>
[2]: 0x400946 <B1::f1()>
[3]: 0x4009a2 <D::f2()>

vtable for 'B2' @ 0x400b88 (subobject @ 0x614c50):
[0]: 0x400a6c <non-virtual thunk to D::~D()>
[1]: 0x400a9d <non-virtual thunk to D::~D()>
[2]: 0x4009ad <non-virtual thunk to D::f2()>
(gdb) info symbol 0x400bb0
vtable for B2 + 16 in section .rodata of /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe
(gdb) info symbol 0x400b58
vtable for D + 16 in section .rodata of /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe
(gdb) info symbol 0x400b88
vtable for D + 64 in section .rodata of /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe

```  

We can get the, for g++ 6, the following 64-bit memory layout for object `b2`: 
```  

(gdb) p b2->int_in_b2
$12 = 0
(gdb) p &(b2->int_in_b2)
$13 = (int *) 0x614c28
(gdb) info vtbl b2
vtable for 'B2' @ 0x400bb0 (subobject @ 0x614c20):
[0]: 0x400952 <B2::~B2()>
[1]: 0x40096a <B2::~B2()>
[2]: 0x400996 <B2::f2()>

(gdb) p &'vtable for B2'
$15 = (<data variable, no debug info> *) 0x400ba0 <vtable for B2>
(gdb) p &'typeinfo for B2'
$16 = (<data variable, no debug info> *) 0x400c30 <typeinfo for B2>

```  
memory layout for object `d`:  

```  
(gdb) info vtbl d
vtable for 'D' @ 0x400b58 (subobject @ 0x614c40):
[0]: 0x400a28 <D::~D()>
[1]: 0x400a72 <D::~D()>
[2]: 0x400946 <B1::f1()>
[3]: 0x4009a2 <D::f2()>

vtable for 'B2' @ 0x400b88 (subobject @ 0x614c50):
[0]: 0x400a6c <non-virtual thunk to D::~D()>
[1]: 0x400a9d <non-virtual thunk to D::~D()>
[2]: 0x4009ad <non-virtual thunk to D::f2()>
(gdb) p &(d->int_in_b1)
$17 = (int *) 0x614c48
(gdb) p &(d->int_in_b2)
$18 = (int *) 0x614c58
(gdb) p &(d->int_in_d)
$19 = (int *) 0x614c5c

(gdb) p &'vtable for D'
$20 = (<data variable, no debug info> *) 0x400b48 <vtable for D>
(gdb) p &'typeinfo for D'
$21 = (<data variable, no debug info> *) 0x400bf0 <typeinfo for D>

```
Notice that functions `f0`, `d` are not in the vtable.  

Overriding method `f2()` in class `D` is implemented by duplicating vtable of `B2` and replacing pointer to `B2::f2()` with pointer to `D::f2()`, as clearly shown above.  

non-virtual thunk, object vtable entries, used to implement multiple inheritance, does offsetting to the correct derived classobject size to the vtable (by the subtraction or `sub` instruction).  cf. [What is a non-virtual thunk?](https://reverseengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/4543/what-is-a-non-virtual-thunk)

```  
(gdb) info symbol 0x400a6c
non-virtual thunk to D::~D() in section .text of /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe
(gdb) info symbol 0x400a9d
non-virtual thunk to D::~D() in section .text of /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe
(gdb) info symbol 0x4009ad
non-virtual thunk to D::f2() in section .text of /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe
(gdb) disassemble 0x400a6c
Dump of assembler code for function _ZThn16_N1DD1Ev:
   0x0000000000400a6c <+0>:	sub    $0x10,%rdi
   0x0000000000400a70 <+4>:	jmp    0x400a28 <D::~D()>
End of assembler dump.
(gdb) info symbol 0x400a9d
non-virtual thunk to D::~D() in section .text of /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe
(gdb) disassemble 0x400a9d
Dump of assembler code for function _ZThn16_N1DD0Ev:
   0x0000000000400a9d <+0>:	sub    $0x10,%rdi
   0x0000000000400aa1 <+4>:	jmp    0x400a72 <D::~D()>
End of assembler dump.
(gdb) info symbol 0x4009ad
non-virtual thunk to D::f2() in section .text of /home/topolo/PropD/HrdwCCppCUDA/Cppcls/vtable.exe
(gdb) disassemble 0x4009ad
Dump of assembler code for function _ZThn16_N1D2f2Ev:
   0x00000000004009ad <+0>:	sub    $0x10,%rdi
   0x00000000004009b1 <+4>:	jmp    0x4009a2 <D::f2()>
End of assembler dump.
```  

As you can clearly see, 2 instructions, `sub`, `jmp`, perform pointer adjustment by subtracting size of the `B2` class.  

cf. [What every C++ programmer should know, The hard part](http://web.archive.org/web/20131210001207/http://thomas-sanchez.net/computer-sciences/2011/08/15/what-every-c-programmer-should-know-the-hard-part/)

*More links*

(I haven't worked this out but this is a very thorough and well written explanation):  

[C++ vtables - Part 1 - Basics (1204 words)](https://shaharmike.com/cpp/vtable-part1/)

## `virtual`  

cf. Ch. 21 Class Hierarchies, **The C++ Programming Language**, Bjarne Stroustrup.  2013.  

## pImpl - pointer to Implementation; shallow copy, deep copy

cf. Item 22: "When using the Pimpl Idiom, define special member functions in the implementation file," pp. 147 of Meyers (2014)   

``` 
class Widget { 			// still in header "widget.h" 
	public:
		Widget();
		~Widget();		// dtor is needed-see below 
		... 
	
	private:
		struct Impl;	// declare implementation struct 
		Impl *pImpl;	// and pointer to it
};
```  

Because `Widget` no longer mentions types \verb|std::string, std::vector|, and `Gadget, Widget` clients no longer need to `#include` headers for these types.  That speeds compilation.  

*incomplete type* is a type that has been declared, but not defined, e.g. `Widget::Impl`.  There are very few things you can do with an incomplete type, but declaring a pointer to it is 1 of them.  

`std::unique_ptr`s is advertised as supporting incomplete types.  But, when `Widget w;`, `w`, is destroyed (e.g. goes out of scope), destructor is called and if in class definition using `std::unique_ptr`, we didn't declare destructor, compiler generates destructor, and so compiler inserts code to call destructor for `Widget`'s data member `m_Impl` (or `pImpl`).  

`m_Impl` (or `pImpl`) is a `std::unique_ptr<Widget::Impl>`, i.e., a `std::unique_ptr` using default deleter. The default deleter is a function that uses `delete` on raw pointer inside the `std::unique_ptr`.  Prior to using `delete`, however, implementations typically have default deleter employ C++11's `static_assert` to ensure that raw pointer doesn't point to an incomplete type.  When compiler generates code for the destruction of the `Widget w`, then, it generally encounters a `static_assert` that fails, and that's usually what leads to the error message.  

To fix the problem, you need to make sure that at point where code to destroy `std::unique_ptr<Widget::Impl>` is generated, `Widget::Impl` is a complete type.  The type becomes complete when its definition has been seen, and `Widget::Impl` is defined inside `widget.cpp`.  For successful compilation, have compiler see body of `Widget`'s destructor (i.e. place where compiler will generate code to destroy the `std::unique_ptr` data member) only inside `widget.cpp` after `Widget::Impl` has been defined.  

For compiler-generated move assignment operator, move assignment operator needs to destroy object pointed to by `m_Impl` (or `pImpl`) before reassigning it, but in the `Widget` header file, `m_Impl` (or `pImpl`) points to an incomplete type.  Situation is different for move constructor.  Problem there is that compilers typically generate code to destroy `pImpl` in the event that an exception arises inside the move constructor, and destroying `pImpl` requires `Impl` be complete.  

Because problem is same as before, so is the fix - *move definition of move operations into the implementation file*.  

For copying data members, support copy operations by writing these functions ourselves, because (1) compilers won't generate copy operations for classes with move-only types like `std::unique_ptr` and (2) even if they did, generated functions would copy only the `std::unique_ptr` (i.e. perform a *shallow copy*), and we want to copy what the pointer points to (i.e., perform a *deep copy*).  

If we use `std::shared_ptr`, there'd be no need to declare destructor in `Widget`.  

Difference stems from differing ways smart pointers support custom deleters.  For `std::unique_ptr`, type of deleter is part of type of smart pointer, and this makes it possible for compilers to generate smaller runtime data structures and faster runtime code.  A consequence of this greater efficiency is that pointed-to types must be complete when compiler-generated special functions (e.g. destructors or move operations) are used.  For `std::shared_ptr`, type of deleter is not part of the type of smart pointer.  This necessitates larger runtime data structures and somewhat slower code, but pointed-to types need not be complete when compiler-generated special functions are employed.  
  

